James Clayton's Lecture The James Clayton Lecture is a special lecture. There
are a series of lectures which are endowed under the will of the late James
Clayton of Torquay, who is an active member of this institution from 1901 to
1944, and to whose generosity we're greatly indebted. The foundation enables
institution council to invite distinguished engineers or scientists to present a
lecture on any subject of importance to the engineering profession at an
occasion such as this. I have very great pleasure in introducing Mr. Gerald D.
Griffin, our lecturer tonight, who took up the post of director of the NASA
Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, just about a year ago. He was
born in Athens, Texas, on the Christmas day, 1934, and received a bachelor's
degree in aeronautical engineering from the Texas University's Agricultural and
Mechanical College, and that was 1956. He served four years as an officer in the
U.S. Air Force. Now, after this service, he was an aerospace engineer with
Douglas Aircraft, Lockheed Missile and Space Company, and General Dynamics. Mr.
Griffin first joined NASA in 1964 and he joined it at the Johnson Space Center
at that time it was the Manned Spacecraft Center and he was a flight director on
all of the 11 Apollo missions he was lead flight director on Apollo 12 on Apollo
15 and Apollo 17 and also involved in all the Gemini flights as a flight
controller. During 1976 to 77, Mr. Griffin was deputy director of the Dryden
Flight Research Center Edwards in California. Following this post, he was
appointed deputy director of the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, And between
July 1980 and June 1981, concurrently served as Associate Administrator for
External Relations in NASA Headquarters at Washington, D.C. Mr. Griffin left
NASA for a year to become Vice President for Systems Engineering and Management
at Scott Science and Technology, Inc. of Lancaster, California. This he did
until taking up his current position with NASA in August 1982. Ladies and
gentlemen, it is my greatest pleasure and honor to ask Mr. Griffin to present
his lecture tonight.
Thank you, Mr. President. It's a great honor to be here. As I toured the
institution this afternoon, I couldn't help but think what had happened within
the confines of this building in the last 137 years or so. And it's a great
privilege just to be able to be here with you and get the feeling of that
community that has meant so much to the world in what has emanated from these
confines. I thank you for your kind of introduction, Mr. President, that every
time I hear that I quite often wonder if the audience might get the impression I
have trouble holding a job.
I've moved around quite a bit, and it's been a great deal of fun. And when I
left NASA in 1981, I thought I'd probably never see it again, and I had been
home barely a year when I was asked to to come back and be the director of the
Johnson Space Center and I could not stop that call. I had to do it and it's
been an extremely interesting two years. We are at a, what I would call a
pivotal point in the American space program. Maybe I should say even the free
world space program, because it truly is an international flavor now. Granted,
we are still in the center of it in the States, but the tentacles are reaching
further and further each day and I am sure that in the next decade, the free
world will join together even more than we ever have before to do so many and
very exciting things in space. I want to talk tonight about the shuttle,
primarily its engineering aspects, I decided that rather than reading my paper
verbatim, that I wanted to expand it to some degree, and I'll do that, I also
will be using some charts that you haven't, if you have a copy of the paper
you're not in there, but I felt it was important to zero in on a couple of areas
that I thought this audience, particularly, might like to hear about. We are in
an infant stage with the Space Shuttle. Despite of what you hear in the press
sometimes, it's going very well. We have flown all of 12 times, and as most of
you, I suspect many of you have been involved in complex programs of one kind or
another, that has not given us all the answers yet that we will need. And a
number of flights will have to be continued before we have all of the
engineering answers and we'll have some problems yet that we will have to face.
But for a system as large and complex as it is, we are quite happy with the
first 12 flights. And I think that in the next year or so, we will close out
most of the nagging, let me call it that, kinds of issues that are still facing
us today.
The presentation is broken into several pieces. I'm going to start with an
overview of the program because I want to make sure that we all begin at the
same starting point.
I use these two slides to try to give you a feel, for those of you that don't
have it, the feel for the size of this vehicle. It is very large. The
dimensions, While I won't read them all, the Orbiter is roughly the size of the
length of a DC-9. It has an aspect ratio or a thickness ratio maybe is a better
term. They're more like a 747, very, very large vehicle. And I've shown it in
isometric form on the right, just to give you a feel for the major pieces. And
they are as follows. The airplane device, we call the orbiter, it rests at
launch on top of a very large external tank and that external tank carries
liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen and strapped onto the side of each, or each
side of the external tank are two very large solid rocket boosters, the largest
we have ever flown in our country. The total weight of this stack at liftoff is
approximately 5.5 million pounds, give or take a few. We produce about 6.5
million pounds of thrust at liftoff, which is a slightly smaller number than we
had in Apollo. The Saturn V generated about 7.5 million pounds to give you a
measure there.
The, perhaps the heart of the system, if one wants to think of it that way, is
the space shuttle orbiter. The orbiter is a very complex avionics machine. Many
people think of it more like an airplane, but let me assure you, and you're
going to see this later on, it is a mechanical engineer's dream. There are more
actuators, cranks, pulleys, structure, just enough to keep any and all of you
very, very happy.
I want to give you a feel for the profile of how the mission has flown before we
get into some of the details. And then if you'll refer to this slide, it kind of
goes around in a sequence. We end up landing back at a runway and going back
into the launch complex. This is a picture back in this phase right at the very
beginning, where we are starting to roll the vehicle to the pad. And in the next
shot you'll see the vehicle on the crawler transporter headed toward the launch
pad. Now this is a very large piece of machinery, the crawler transporter itself
weighs about six million pounds. It's the same crawler transporter that we used
in Apollo, and we've got two of them. They were refurbed. In fact, about the
only thing we did to them was replace the soft goods since Apollo, and it was
directly usable in this use. The Mobile Launcher is the rather square device
that the stack is sitting on. It weighs another eight million pounds. It, in
itself, is like a little factory. It's got quite a lot of plumbing and servicing
for the vehicle in it. And then the orbiter sitting on top of there in the dry
configuration without any propellants and it's another three and a half million
pounds or so. This brings a total, then, as we're progressing to the pad of
about 18 million pounds on the roll. It moves at about a half a mile an hour to
a mile per hour and it's a distance of about three and a half miles. So it's a
pretty much major part of the day to make the trek from the vehicle assembly
building out to the launch pad. The next shot will show you that as it's coming
up onto the pad, you can see in this area here, this is the flame trench. And
this whole mobile launcher is moved up on top of the flame trench and is set
into place on rather large pistols. And then the crawler is removed. It's
hydraulically lowered, and then it backs back down the pad and gets out of the
way. So then the engines are fully exposed to the flame trench. The next shot is
a shot of the vehicle this happens to be STS 1 made at night. And it's a very
pretty sight. It's always lit up very brightly, some of you may have seen some
launches and they usually occur, Here is something roughly like the birth of
babies. It seems late at night or early in the morning. And it's a beautiful
sight. Very dynamic. And I hope some of you can someday, if you haven't seen
one, see it sitting there. There's a very inspiring thing before lift-off. Just
to see that much energy harnessed, sitting there ready to go is a real sight.
Now, the launch phase begins with the ignition of the main engines. There are
three main engines in the rear of the orbiter. They produce about a half million
pounds of thrust each, and each solid rocket produces about two and a half
million pounds of thrust. So we start the main engines about eight seconds prior
to lift-off. and as soon as they are up to thrust and measured correctly then we
send the ignition signal to the solid rocket boosters and once that happens it's
leaving. Even if the hold down bolts don't fire it's gone.
We've not had a we've that's about a triply redundant system to make sure those
bolts fired the vehicle sits on the on the base of the solid rocket boosters and
there's four attach posts on each and as you can imagine we want to make sure it
lets go. So as soon as you'd like the rocket engine, I'm sorry, the solid rocket
engine, you have liftoff. On the left, the only reason I'm not going to repeat
any of those numbers, they're there. But I wanted to show you that was an
artist's rendition of what liftoff should look like. It's a, you'll notice
there's a date up in the upper right hand corner of October 79. And because of
some delays in the shuttle, we had to get people to trust us, as that's what it
would look like. But finally, on the right, you to see the lift off of a real
one, and indeed, it looked very much like we had planned. The early launch phase
is a very dynamic one, and it happens at about 60 seconds after liftoff, we pass
through a very high queue, a high dynamic pressure region. That's about the
roughest part of the ride. the astronauts report at that point that there are
some vibration, some noise, a lot of wind noise even that they can still hear.
And at about two minutes after liftoff, the solid rockets are expended. All of
their propellant is burned. And they are jettisoned away from the external tank.
And at that point, you still have the three main engines producing about a half
million pounds of thrust each and the orbiter sitting on top of this external
tank that's feeding those engines with liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen. Now,
on the left again was an artist's rendition of what that should look like, and
on the right you actually see the solid rocket boosters. They have been
separated. You can see the three main engines are still burning, and you can see
the faint haze of the external tank. This was taken with a ground-based camera
at Patrick Air Force Base, and then you can see the solid rockets have been
jettisoned and they are still burning some residual, what we call, tail-off
types of propellant, but they're producing a little to no thrust and at this
point, when they go through about 50% of thrust, we immediately get off of it
because it starts to be more of a drag than it is a help, and thrust decays very
quickly. The next shot is a picture of the boosters tumbling before they are
recovered, and in the next shot you will see the deployment of the Drogue
parachute. Here's the drogue that is starting to stabilize this one rocket, this
drogue chute is 54 feet in diameter, and it pulls out three main chutes for each
rocket that are 115 feet in diameter each. So that, these are the largest
parachutes that have ever been built for any operational purpose. And if that
isn't enough on the last flight, we were getting a little water damage in this
half in quite a lot of water damage, because even with 115-foot chutes, we were
impacting the water at about 88 feet per second, roughly 60 miles an hour. So we
wanted to slow that down some more. The last flight, on the right-hand booster,
we flew three main parachutes of 136 feet diameter on each, and we got much
reduced velocity at impact, a lot less damage, and so from the subsequent
flights from here on we're going to fly 136 foot parachutes as the main chutes
the these things land about 122 miles or so down-range and float and are
recovered they float in a vertical mode we go in with the with a nozzle in the
bottom make an airtight seal blow the air blow the water out replace it with air
and they float horizontal at that point and and we tow them into Cape Canaveral,
take them apart, send them back to the factory and get a new one. It comes apart
in several segments. And they are loaded up at Thiokol in the state of Utah. The
segments are sent by rail and then they're sent back to us loaded by rail. As we
go on higher during the launch phase, we finally get to the point where we shut
the main engines off. that's just short of orbital velocity. The reason we do
that is because we want this external tank, which is only piece of the system
that's not reusable, we want it to re-enter the atmosphere, and indeed from the
cap, it does re-enter and go into the Indian Ocean, mostly in very small pieces.
In fact, there's very little of it left. It's a very lightweight structure, only
weighs 78,000 pounds empty. As you can see, it's very large, 28 feet in
diameter, and as I recall, about 150 feet long. And we do a small separation
maneuver, which the artist rendition on the left shows, to get away from the
tank, and in the right-hand picture, is the actual picture of an external tank
that was taken from an engineering camera located on the base of the orbiter
vehicle as it's separated. One of the things that you can see is you can see
some, in the actual photograph, you You can see some charring of the rear end
and that's because it gets very hot. This whole tank is covered with what we
call SOFI, Spray on Foam insulation, used for two purposes, one is to, these are
cryogenic fuels and we must keep them as well insulated as we can and it also
gives protection to the exit heating that we get. And at this point, the orbiter
is moving at a speed of about 25,000 feet per second, slightly short of orbital
velocity. And with the orbital maneuvering system that's on the, and I'll show
you a better picture of this later, but it's located in the pod of the vehicle
back here in the back, two 6,000 pound thrusters, we top off the last bit of
velocity needed to get into orbit about 200 feet or two to three hundred feet
more per second. And at that point we're in orbit and ready to go into
operation.
In the next chart I'm going to go back to the sequence chart because I'm going
to be discussing now this orbital operations portion of the flight before I get
to the entry. This picture on the right is a picture of STS-41B, and I'll tell
you a story of why that's got such a funny number. As you know, we had an
occasion on Apollo 13. One day when we were headed to the moon, the oxygen tank
blew up, and it so happened that we launched that vehicle at 13, 13 hours. And
there are a number of people that says we probably should never have another
spaceship with the number 13 attached to it. So we tried to devise a system
that's got everyone thoroughly confused, but we don't have an STS-13. The four,
when I say 41 Bravo, STS-4, that's fiscal year 84, one is a launch from the East
Coast, and B is the second mission in the year. Now, if I haven't got you all
confused by now, something's wrong. This happens to be a shot on orbit taken
from a SPAS spacecraft This was a spacecraft that was inside the payload bay,
deployed, and looked back at the orbiter. It was eventually recaptured and put
back into the payload bay and brought home, would we find that payload again.
Incidentally, it was built by the Germans very inexpensively. And it was a super
payload. It was three-axis stabilized and performed very well. You're looking at
the two. To give you an idea, this housed two satellites that were deployed
before the shot was taken. Those are sun shields that cover them up to protect
them thermally. And in this picture, they've already been deployed. But those
were the two that failed as they were ignited to go on to higher altitude. And I
might add parenthetically that we have now been working for about six months.
This happened in February. We've been working for the last 5-6 months on
techniques to recover those satellites. And the Indonesians that owned one of
them have given us the go ahead. And we think Western Union is going to give us
the go ahead and we're going to fly a mission month after next, November. Where
we will go retrieve those satellites, put them back into the cargo bay and bring
them back to Earth. And return them to their owners.
Um... This was a place where we got some relatively bad press because it always
was attached to us, NASA. I mean, actually it was a commercially developed upper
stage. NASA did not have anything to do with that development. Satellite users
chose to use them for a price and insurance, etc. Those have all been paid off,
and it is a good stage. On the last mission we did fly two more of the...of this
same upper stage, the mission that just landed, and they worked just fine.
Interestingly enough, we think the problem there was with the composite nozzles
that these devices use, and we have...this, the community has figured out a way
to scan those nozzles. In fact, they're using a CAT scan process, much like the
brain scan, that can detect voids in the composite. We think that's That's what
had happened through a process era, there had been voids in that, and so we've
corrected that. The on-orbit operations can involve a great deal of other
things. Let me show you a picture. This is the deployment of one of those
satellites. I can't tell you which one it is. You can see the earth to the left.
It has been ejected by springs, and it is spinning on its way out of the Orbiter
Bay. I know you don't get to see much of this on TV anymore, but on American
television we replay these things after they happened. They normally happen out
of sight of the station and we have to dump it on video tape. So we get to see
these things happen quite well. We saw all three satellites that were launched
on the last vehicle. Other orbital operations involved this is an experience
what we call the LDF, standing for long-duration exposure facility. It's a 20
,000-pound structure that we have put many kinds of materials and
components—some
electronic components, even—on the outer skin of it. We deployed it about 6
months ago. It will stay in orbit for a year. And then we will go retrieve it,
bring it back down in order to conduct studies on what the space environment
does to these kinds of materials, long duration exposure. Obviously, if we're
going to be, if we want our systems to last longer we're going to have to make
sure that we provide the right kind of coatings, right kind of protection. And
we want to know more about the long-term effects of the space environment. This
was incidentally built all in-house at NASA. Some structures engineers at
Langley Center had a, a real good time at this one. And that's the remote
manipulator arm that you see poking out the top. It's actually holding onto it
at deployment, and then it just let it go. And it's stabilized by gravity
gradient. And with this long axis pointing it to Earth. Another kind of
operation we do is are manned operations. A number of EVAs are scheduled,
extravehicular activities are scheduled in the near future. This is a picture of
Bruce McCanliss on the checkout of the man maneuvering unit. It was the first
time we had put a man outside and cut him loose without any tethers. It worked
very well, and we are in the process now. We've flown another mission since
then. It's when we repaired the SolarMax mission. We did have some problem with
the recovery device. So as a result, we finally captured the SolarMax satellite
that we repaired with the remote manipulator arm. But maneuvering unit worked
fine. We are going to... on the retrieval mission that I mentioned earlier, we
will be using the MMU to retrieve the two satellites that have failed to get
into the proper orbit. And the astronaut will have a device on the front of him,
we call it a stinger, which will actually... he'll fly out and poke it into the
nozzle of the spent stage on the uh on the uh upper stage and then it has a we
call it a molly bolt or a lag bolt kind of device that pulls out then he
tightens it down and he drags it back to the shuttle at that point he puts a
grapple fixture on it remote arm reaches in gets it puts it back into the
payload bay that's what it says here and that's what we're gonna try to do
A fellow that is going to do that is a good friend of some other people here in
the hall tonight. His name is Joe Allen. He is a scientist. He is also one of
the best EVA specialists that we have. Joe got that assignment. He's happy to do
it.
All right, now I'm coming down the right-hand side of the left chart. As we
start to end the mission, then what we do is we slow the vehicle down by about
300 feet per second, and that's enough to knock it out of orbit. We do that with
those same engines that we topped off the orbital velocity with. We just turn
the vehicle around and fire it backwards.
We do that about 4,400 nautical miles from the landing site. At that time, we're
back to about 25,000 feet per second. And in the early stages of entry, as you
see depicted by this picture, the angle of attack is like 40 degrees. So it's
very high. Here is a picture taken again from a ground-based camera during
entry. And this is at an altitude of only about 100,000 feet. And at this point,
the vehicle has slowed down. It is a glider, it has no power, obviously. So it's
a one-shot landing and it better be right the first time. The uh touchdown speed
varies uh to... from about 180 to 230 knots. There is a very steep descent. It's
a 24 degree glide slope. Standard aircraft is roughly on the order of a degree
and a half two degrees. This is very steep. There's a pre-flare maneuver at
about 2,500 feet and then he slows down and crosses the boundary and puts it on
the ground. That has worked very well, and what I want to do now is show you a
little bit about how the structure is put together in the vehicle. Here's a
touchdown on the lakebed. We go to the lakebed on occasions when we did for all
of the landing tests that we did early in the program, because there's a lot of
room for air. It turns out we didn't need much runway and it all worked well. We
also go to the lakebed for the first flight of any new orbiter, and that's one
reason That's why we landed Discovery on this last flight. We landed back at the
lake bed because it was the first time we had flown that vehicle. And we've got,
I should say, we've got three vehicles delivered now, Challenger, Columbia and
Discovery. And we are awaiting the delivery in about March of next year of
Atlantis, which will give us four orbiters. and then there is a... I guess I
could call it a controversy, at least a discussion, on the possibility of
building a fifth orbiter. But at about $1.7 billion per copy in dollars, it's a
decision that is not going to be easy to get it and, frankly, I don't know
whether we will or not. The four-vehicle fleet will support the flight rate that
we have planned, but there are some people that feel like a fifth would give us
some insurance, and that's kind of what it falls on. On the structural side of
this vehicle—now I'll go right on to the next slide—I wanted to point out one
thing. This vehicle is—the Orbiter is literally built all over the United
States. And comes together at Palmdale, California to be a symbol. The wing for
instance is built by Grumman, the mid fuselage, the area that you see this whole
...I'll rearrange my pointer here, can you see that? this whole area here is
built by General Dynamics. The payload bay doors are built by Rockwell, the crew
cabin and the forward fuselage are all Rockwell. The tail is built by Fairchild,
the almost pods are built by McDonnell Douglas. Literally all over the States,
we've got people building basic structure to this vehicle. The words on that
left-hand chart pretty well explain the kind of technology that we use to build
a structure. It's pretty much basic airplane structure. We decided to do that
and then cover it with thermal protection. Aluminum will take generally an the
area of 350 degrees temperature, without permanent deformation. So we had to
design a thermal protection system that I'll talk about a little bit later that
ensured that the temperature at the aluminum would not exceed 350 degrees. And
that worked very well. On the right, you see an exploded view and a visible
looking inside the structure. I put that there for reference to show you that it
is basically a rib and stringer type a device. Now let's look at each major
piece. Here's the forward fuselage, the crew module. The crew module, which is
just this pressurized area here, had to be built and isolated from thermal
deformations because it is a pressure holding device. So it is fully welded,
integrally machined panels that are completely welded, no bolts or anything
holding it together. The rest of the structure however, and then that I should
say too, that that cabin free floats inside the upper and lower forward fuselage
halves in that it is isolated. Its loads are taken out through the vertical and
side longitudinal loads for instance. There's a fitting here and a fitting on
the far side that looks something like prunion devices that take loads in two
directions. There's a pin here that will only take load in one direction and is
allowed to rotate in any other. It also takes out vertical. That associated with
the two trunnions takes out the vertical load. And then there's a lateral load
fitting down here in this area on each side that only takes out the lateral
loads. So the crew module is inside this outer shell, if you will, and isolated
from the thermal deformations that are on the outside skin.
That was a real problem in the initial design because these wells are long,
they're big, and they were subject to a lot of manufacturing era early on. And
they we felt like they had to be essentially perfect. And indeed that's, they've
turned out to work very well. We've learned a lot about it in the crew module
that we built for the Atlantis vehicle, which will be delivered next year. where
the learning curve in those four builds was extreme. Took them much less time.
The first one was tough, and they had to redo many wells and they had a lot of
engineering headache, mostly associated with manufacturing techniques, just to
make these rather long wells. That's come along very nicely, however, in the
last build.
The aft structure is very interesting, and that's this area right here. This has
to, of course, the main engines fit into there, so there's a tremendous load
placed on that structure. And I've got two views of that. This one on the right
is more or less the outer skin view, if you will, and there's nothing too
dynamic here. machined bulkheads and and intergly machined skin in some cases,
but for the most part nothing too exotic. It's when you turn around look at it
from the other side, and this is at the rear of that aft rest structure, and
those members are where they react all the loads for the main engine, it's got
to dump those loads into the rest of the orbiter structure. To build and that's
large, it's hard to tell here but it is an extremely large piece of structures
and we went to a diffusion bonding technique titanium in this case and if you're
familiar with diffusion bonding you put it in strips and put it under pressure
and heat until it flew- the way I think of it is it flows smoothly and and makes
a solid, homogeneous beam
or structural member. The fact was is that in those days we could just not get
forgings as large as we needed, and that's why they went to diffusion bonding,
which is a very expensive and slow process. If we build the fifth orbiter and in
the fourth orbiter that's already built, those both in the 10 years it's taken
us to develop shuttle, we now have forgings that will fit it, So we've actually
changed on 104, or I'm sorry, Atlantis, and 104 is a vehicle number. We've
changed to a forging for this aft thrust structure. The other thing we did is
that we found out we could... I want to point out these boron epoxy tubular
struts. That's a bit of a misnomer. What we did, we could save some weight by
bonding boron epoxy composite on the outside of the titanium structure. And we
saved, as I recall, the number about 20% in our weight by strengthening the
titanium with a bonded boron epoxy over the top. That's worked very well, and we
think that in ¯¯¯ It's one of the things that we really think in future
structural work that we'll see more and more of. than getting the metal out and
using epoxy, or I'm sorry, composite materials to give you added strength. The
air source structure as you can imagine is a very critical item. We inspect this
very carefully after each flight, the cracks, et cetera. It's held up extremely
well and done well. Talk about some of the other mechanical systems. I'm not
going to go into all the structure, I want to talk about some of the other
mechanical systems. And this is where I say earlier, you're a mechanical
engineer's delight. We've got a lot of moving parts on this vehicle, the doors,
vents, remote manipulators, landing gear, etc., and I want to talk about a
couple of them. Let's talk about the main and the nose gears. This is an
interesting design. It's very simple. Things get very simple when you only have
one opportunity to land and you can't... there's no reason to have a retraction
system because there's no ability to go around and so we were able to design
this system very simply, very reliably. It's really a gravity fall is all it is,
you just hydraulically unlock the latches and there's some stored energy
hydraulic pistons that help show the thing down and they all fold forward so
that the air load also helps to.... ...as you're moving helps to drop them, have
worked very, very well. The one test that we have yet to do, we've used for
steering only differential braking to date. And we're going to, in the next
flight or two, engage nose wheels steering. And the reason we haven't is we have
had some problems in the control laws that it's a very heavy machine and a very
small gear. And some of you that have dealt with airplanes on the same line, we
haven't needed nose wheel steering and they could engage it anytime they need
it. But if they haven't needed it, they felt comfortable using differential
breaker. But this system has worked extremely well and it's very simple, very
reliable.
The other system that I want to talk about is not many people understand how
important what I'm about to say is. If I can make this error work and you can
see it right here on the bottom of the orbiter is the only way we can get the
liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen into the main engines. We do that through
these two doors. We call it the ET closeout doors. And then those doors must
close because that's one of the hotter areas of the vehicle on entry. So I
can't, in a line drawing, explain to you exactly how the doors work, but I can
tell you they are folded back from their closed position 180 degrees. Actually,
they're folded this way toward each other. There's a device that latches the two
of them together because this has to go through ascent through this high dynamic
pressure region and all, without fluttering and coming apart. And then, after
the tank is separated, the doors are actuated closed all the way around, and
then firmly hogged in and pulled in with latches to give a very tight seal, so
that you don't leak hot gases in there during the entry. It's something we can't
see. It must work. The crew actuates these doors closed. And they get some talk
backs. They tell them that they're closed in the cockpit, but it's strictly a
trust that they indeed did close and close firmly. So we've, they spent a lot of
time, these are beryllium doors because they did not want them to deform. And
then they've got tile actually glued onto them, bonded to them, that give you
the thermal protection. Very, very important device and it's a little bit...that
could be for one of the nail if it didn't work right. She was lost and therefore
the battle. But I'm happy to report we've had no problems with that. The payload
bay doors are very large. They're 60 feet long. They are made of graphite epoxy
and they are covered. since this is a cool area of the vehicle, they're covered
with a Nomex blanket on top. It looks like a blanket of Nomex. There are four 15
-foot panels on each side, and on the back side of the doors are the radiators
that we pump Freon 21 through and pump it through the coal plates where the
avionics are and take out the heat that's generated inside the orbiter. Two of
the radiator panels on each side can also be deployed, and you can see that in
the left hand, you can also see it in the right hand version. They can be
differentially deployed from the doors and that gives you radiation out both
sides, both surfaces, and we have done that in orbit. However, most of the heat
loads that we have worked with, we've been able to leave the two forward panels
on each side undeployed, and when we don't have to have it, we prefer not to
because it's just one less thing that could go wrong if you had to reenter
rather to fast and you didn't have time to do an EVA to go out and cut the
links. There are continuously ways to get doors closed and all by going EVA, but
you need a little time. These devices have worked very well. The area that we
had, and you're going to hear me say a little bit about it, these latches around
the bulkhead here. There's some forward latches, and the latches down on the
centerline were a real kinematic problem to solve. Well, they've worked well,
we've had one problem, and I'll mention that in just a minute. I'll spend a few
charts on the thermal protection system, which is a subject in itself for this
vehicle. Maybe I should have said, to some of you that may not know, this
vehicle is fully reusable, and it's the first spaceship that we've ever built
for that purpose. In fact, its the first spaceship that's ever been built
anywhere for that purpose. Some interesting figures, the mercury program,
Gemini, Apollo, all used a blade-y material because it was a one-time use. And
it heated and sloughed off and that was it. When we started talking about the
shuttle, we had to do something that could be reusable without this giant
turnaround problem of trying to replace bladers. The decision was made to use a
rigidized silica fiber, it's glass. You hold one of these tiles, which is
typically six inches or so square, anywhere from two to three inches in
thickness, and it feels like a piece of styrofoam. It's very, very light. And if
you look at the next chart, which is not a very good picture, I wanted to try to
get something to show you what the cross-section looked like. The rigidized
fiber that's shown here, this is a microscopic view and the rigidized fiber is a
99.6% pure silica. And it's in a it's in a cut fiber length that's mixed with
liquid silica which we call Ludox to make a slurry. It is then pressed into the
right volume to get the density we want, which is about 9 pounds per cubic foot.
And it's then baked at 2,400 degrees for some length of time. And it forms a
very hard brick of this very light material. It's then machined with a milling
machine computerized to very tight tolerances because it must match a smooth
service on the outside of the vehicle.
The coating that we put over that, because this is very soft. you can poke your
finger into it, is a liquid glass coating, borosilicate by name, which doesn't
mean much to me. I don't know whether that means much to you or not, but it's
borosilicate and it is a liquid glass that makes, gives the tile a very hard
surface. You can poke through it with a sharp fingernail or a screwdriver, but
it is, it gives it a hard surface.
And then these are bonded to the, and I'll show you how that's done, is bonded
to the aluminum directly. The tile has been in later vehicles replaced by quite
a lot of what we call advanced flexible reusable surface insulation, AF-FRISI,
and that is more of a blanket material. We could do that because in the earlier
flights we had a lot of data taken on temperatures. And as most thermal
engineers, like most mechanical engineers, there was some conservative estimates
made and we found some areas of the vehicle not as hot as we had expected. So we
were able to go to this more cloth-like insulation. But we were only able to
catch Discovery, which we've just flown, and 104 in Atlantis to come. So what
we've got now is we've got a fleet of vehicles that have different, they look
pretty much to the eyeball constant, but there's actually quite a lot of
difference in the outside protection of thermal purposes.
I know you can't read the chart on the left. You can't read the fine numbers.
But it's a picture of the upper part of it is the lower surface view. And on the
top of that vehicle, in the bottom half of that plan form is the upper surface
view. And those are isotherms that, for the worst case design mission that we
can think of. And let me just summarize by saying the lower forward fuselage
right up in the chin area is the hottest. That peaks up around 2,300 degrees.
The lower wing is about 2,000 and the lower body flap that is around that same 2
,400. You'll see some higher figures on this chart. But again, that's this
extreme design mission that we designed our system to, I don't think we'll ever
see it. There are hotter temperatures, and if you look on the next chart, the
reinforced carbon-carbon is used on the very tip of the nose, on the leading
edge of the wing, primarily. And those areas are greater than 2300 degrees, and
there we had to go to this reinforced carbon-carbon. It's a laminated structure.
it's coated with silicon carbide to keep it from oxidizing. And we are slowly
trying to, let me say, lighten those panels by several techniques. And I think
in the future, we will be able to go back and retrofit those leading edge panels
and the nose with lighter material. That composite high-strength technology is
growing by leaps and bounds, as most of you are probably aware. And there are
some materials now that are beginning to look very promising. But the reinforced
carbon-carbon has worked very, very well. On the bottom of the vehicle, look at
the top half of the right-hand picture there, where it says lower surface, is
most all black tile. The black tile has got the coating. It's a glass coating,
as I mentioned earlier, but it takes the higher temperatures. It'll take between
1,200 and about 2,300 degrees temperature. The cross-hatched area on the, if you
look at the bottom half of the top chart, on the right, or the top planform, is
mostly white tile. And that tile has a different coating which is a little
lighter. And it's good from about 700 to 1,200 degrees. And that's in the area,
that's the area where we have replaced a lot of that material on 103, I'm sorry,
I used the vehicle numbers, on Discovery and Atlantis, we have replaced a lot of
the white tile with this flexible claw. And then we've got a few places where we
had to use metallic close outs because we just couldn't do it any other way.
Now, next chart. The tile is laid up like this. The one on the right,
incidentally, the shot on the right here, is the bottom of the vehicle as it's
being hoisted in the vehicle assembly building. And I showed it just to, I threw
it in here, it's a little dark, but to show you that that's all black tile,
that's all the high insulation tile, and you can see, although you can't see the
detail, that's this area where the external tank doors that have to get closed
properly are on the open here because we're getting ready to mate it to the
external tank. On the left you will see the tile, the way it's put together,
these are about six inch blocks. The reason these things have no essentially
flexibility to them, but the skin had to give. So, they were put together with a
certain gap and a certain step in there, step tolerance between one tile to the
next, very tight. And we did that so that the tile could move, if you will, and
we had to put the gap in because if we didn't ... they were buddied up together.
As they bent they would break on each other. so we, the gap was varies from
about 45,000ths of an inch to about 20,000ths of an inch.
The step tolerance depends on which side of the vehicle you're on, but where it
says step here on the, on the upper portion of this right in here, if you can
see that, varies...those tolerances vary from about 17,000ths to 50,000ths, and
again depending on the heat influx there. It's bonded. I mean, the aluminum is
first painted with RTV. Standard, pretty much standard RTV adhesive. There's
then a strain isolation pad, and that's a Nomex pad. It's roughly a tenth of an
inch thick or so. And that's in order to let the vehicle flex again without
breaking the bond that's put on next. And then RTV is painted on top of that,
and the tile is bonded on to the RTV there. So you have aluminum, you have RTV,
you have a strain isolation pad, RTV, and then the tile. We bond these things,
and then we do pool tests on them and we actually listen with a highly sensitive
sonic device to see if we can hear any breaking. And there's a certain number
of—and I don't know the number, but it's a certain number of clicks per second
that is acceptable. Frankly, it makes me nervous to have any clicks. But there
is an acceptable standard that as you start to pull on it and you listen with
this sonic device after it's cured, it has to pass an inspection. We have had
super luck after we got past the first vehicle with this technique. The first
vehicle was very much of a learning experience, many, many errors made. As a
matter of fact, Columbia had essentially all of its tiles, 32,000 of them put on
at one time. They all came off and not at once, but we kept finding problems and
we took them all off and put them back on again. That's probably the primary
reason the shuttle was 18 months to two years late getting off the ground. It
was because of the tile problem. The other vehicles have gone very, very easily,
and I think this is one that's behind us. I might just mention Discovery
and Atlantis, the last two orbiters, have only 21,000 tile on them. The Columbia
and Challenger had over 30,000 on each. So we have made quite an improvement in
getting away from the detailed replacement of these tiles. Ok, let's look at
some typical problems that we have had, and there's certainly not all of them,
and I do this with a little trepidation. My friends in the American press tend
to hang around in this area a lot. And many of the things that I'm going to show
you here have been relatively minor, some not so minor. But all in all, I think
we've learned a great deal from solving these things. One that you wouldn't
think of, and this I'll have to orient you a little bit, you're looking at the
launch pad, and you'll remember that I told you that as we put this mobile
launcher down, these are the flame trenches. This is where the solid rocket
boosters exhaust their gases down into the flame trench. And on STS-1, when we
flew it the first time, we got a tremendous resurgence of energy from when the
SRBs ignited to the point that it popped and buckled the aft heat shield around
the main engines. The engine's bells were all knocked around and so forth. And
we had to extrapolate from a 1-6 scale model. And we missed it by a lot. So what
we did, and it was obvious, the pictures of the lift off of STS-1, the detailed
engineering were frightening because you can see the engine bells deformed and
you can see the aft heat shield pop a couple of times. So a very simple
solution. This was laid to some folks at Johnson and the Kennedy Space Center.
This is a close up. You can see it not too well here. This is before we put this
device in. But here, these are water troughs. Let me go to the next slide and
I'll show you. this is parachute type material. And that's water you see in
there, about a foot deep, that we just laid across the hole. And the purpose is
that when the SRBs ignite, you absorb that energy with this water. It just blows
this stuff completely away. It's gone. Almost vaporizes it. But it was a very
simple fix. We wrestled with all kinds of ways to absorb that energy so that it
would not go all the way down to the bottom of the flame trench and rebound into
the, into the orbiter. As it turns out, this has worked very nicely. I was
strictly skeptical of this. I didn't think it would work at all, but the
engineers kept running the figures and they said, yeah, yeah it will work. So
sure enough, we tried it, and it has. Now we've got some very exotic ways to fix
it later with water sprays and all that sort of thing, but this thing works so
well and it's so inexpensive, I suspect we'll be stuck with this for a long time
and it's very reliable. But again it's a problem that you wouldn't even think
about. There's no way, as most of you have been involved in trying to scale
large things, When you try to scale them down or when you take something small
and scale it up, scaling errors can really get to you. And that's what really
happened here.
Ok, here was a problem we had on STS-3 and STS-4. Third and fourth flight of the
shuttle. So we tried to close the payload bay doors, and lo and behold, the
first time they tried it, there was an interference, and it didn't work. As a
matter of fact, the latches on that aft bulkhead, which is this area right in
here, would not make up. The door was not down far enough to make up. The
fellows looked at it profoundly and said, Now what have we done to this vehicle?
Well, we had some reasons to be in a tail sun attitude, tail licking at the sun
for a long, long period. And then we also had a reason to be no sun attitude.
And what had happened is the vehicle had gotten very cold on the top, and it
actually made the orbiter, if I can exaggerate a bit, shaped a little bit like a
banana, like this. The same thing happened on STS 4, due to another factor, and
I'll show you why in a minute. But all we had to do was, we just rotated the
vehicle and exposed it to the sun for about four hours, and the vehicle
straightened back out, and then we could get the doors closed. Uh, since then,
we are very careful to ensure that we do the proper thermal conditioning prior
to entry to make sure that the vehicle is pretty much straight.
Let me go to the next subject, another problem. This is one that in our press,
and I don't know where you've had it over here or not, but our press has
completely blown this, quote, problem out of proportion. As most of you that
have probably dealt with large aircraft with small gears, brakes are a problem
because you've got to dissipate an awful lot of energy into some fairly small
area. This system, those statters, there's three of them. The rotors, there's
four, and they rotate concurrently inside each other. And then there's eight
pucks that is just a big disc brake. Eight pucks push on one side and there are
four pucks on each of two hydraulic systems. So in case you lose a hydraulic
system, you still got half your brakes um... and what has happened is we've
never had a problem with the brakes stopping the vehicle they always stop the
vehicle fine but it is a turnaround problem because we were picking up damage to
the to the rotors primarily and I'll show you a picture one and it's so it's a
turnaround issue we've had to take the brakes off every time we've flown and
take a look at them inspect them carefully we've made a few changes one of the
problems was that axle was deflecting quite a lot it was putting some funny
torques into the rotors and stators so we've stiffened that up with some saddles
and we're seeing less and less damage all the time in fact the last flight which
is not a picture but last flight we saw virtually no damage at all. You can see
here a clip and I'm gonna show you a different view in a minute but there's a
clip bent They have a shape, right here. These are the rotors. One, two, three,
four. And one of these clips here is bent. I'll show you a picture from the
side. Now this looks pretty bad. These are beryllium discs and they are faced
with carbon between the pads, if you will. And this is the worst rotor that we
had. You can see that the beryllium actually here, I can't get my arrow that
high without it going off, right here actually broke. And, we had another break
here in the beryllium. We had a number of clips and all that were destroyed. But
even on this flight, the breaking worked just fine. And in fact, it's all
contained so it can't go anywhere, but it is a turnaround issue. We think we're
on this one that we haven't completely fixed yet. that on the last flight, we
had just a little bit of galling on these carbon facing plates, if you will. And
we had a couple of rivets that had broken. But that's one of the, when I say a
year from now, I think we'll have some of the nagging things taken out, I think
that's one of the ones that will get completely solved. Now the next one's an
interesting one. I used the shot on the left here just to show you where it's a
little bit like being up close to an elephant and you can't tell what you're
looking at right here is the area that on the first flight we received a big
surprise it's on that ohms pod, there's the pod and right at the base of this
right here which this is the vehicle sitting on the ground if you look right
here you'll see a discolored area These Ohms pods are also graphite skinned,
graphite epoxy skinned. Now let me move you in a little bit closer, there's the
corner of the pod and there was flow coming, evidently during the entry. Flow
was coming up through this body flap area and impinging hot gas in an area, in a
way we didn't think was going to happen. This caused delamination of the
graphite epoxy, quite a bit of burning, although it didn't cause any structural
damage inside. We did have to cut that whole section out of this Ohms pod. We
had to remove the pod, and they were just now getting it back to service. They
had to cut it out and lay up the graphite epoxy again. And the way we fixed it
is that we just placed 25, we put 25 tile in this area. We didn't try to stop
the flow that would have required a major redesign of some type, but we just
covered this area with tile, black tile, and it hasn't been a problem since.
Another problem we had, looking at the rear end of the vehicle, sitting on the
ground, there is a nozzle right here, a thruster. We call it a vernier thruster,
and it's very low thrust, It's only a 25 pounder. These big primary thrusters
for controlling attitude are 875-pounders and we really don't use them very much
except during entry on orbit. They're like somebody hits the vehicle with a
hammer every time they fire. They're large and they're powerful. So we use these
little 25 pound vernier thrusters and this thing exhausts, this is one of the
down firing thrusters out of this ohms line, and it exhausts down on and you can
see a light area right in here on this is the body flap and these are black tile
back in here and you can see a light area and if you look over here you can see
where this exhaust products were hitting on top of the body flap and it was
peeling off the it was just literally taking the coating off the off the tile so
what we did very simple fix again to show you don't always have to be really
exotic we just have on later vehicles which we butter, if you will, RTV, tenth
of an inch thick, over the top of this entire area, right in here. And just let
the stuff impinge. And the RTV protects the coating of the tile. And it winds up
being a super fix with very simple process. They just paint it on almost like a
brush. And we look at it each flight, inspect it, and then replace it if we have
to. We have another tile problem.
This is meant to be a continuous picture. So I didn't quite make it. If you'll
notice here on SDS-2, there's actually six coatings on tiles. This is sitting on
the lake bed after the landing. One, two, three, four, five, and six. Before
this flight, we had some particularly heavy rain, time, and we had used,
essentially, Scotchguard to waterproof the tiles. And, in fact, it was actually
done out of spray cans, which was the technique we were going to use because it
was simple. We knew after the heat of reentry, it burns off the Scotchguard, so
we knew that we would have to do something, flight to flight. But we got it
Scotchguarded, and then we found out that it… And then we had some very, very
heavy rain while we were sitting on the pad, and what happened is we actually
trapped. We got a little leakage in some tiles, and we trapped some water under
the coating. And then in the mission, during the mission, this area, because of
the attitude we were in, got down below minus 100 degrees F. And with the
freezing of that water, with no way to get out quickly, it literally popped the
top off these black tile. I've got a picture of the close-up here. You can see
how it just peeled off the coating in very jagged shapes. uh, and it was because
of the trapped water. And what we've done since then is we developed a new
method of waterproofing. And we actually waterproofed internal to the tile. We
actually went around and on each tile put a hyperdermic type of needle through
the coating, very small hole, and injected hexamethyldiazalazine. And I don't
know if that means anything to you either. It doesn't to me. But I tried to find
a commercial name for it, and there is none. but this material actually is
absorbed by the tile through this small hole and we're using the same hole each
flight now there's actually a machine that goes through and and puts this thing
in and it's actually worked very well and it's rapid it's they can they can do
it very fast again you just can't stand now that on this leading edge if you
look close here it got hot enough that there's Maybe there's some slumping of
the tile, but it didn't hurt anything behind it. There are some areas,
particularly in that chin area, where you couldn't take this kind of damage. You
could take it and it would do some damage. You'd probably live through it, but
you sure would hurt the vehicle in the process. Final area on tile, if you look
on the left in this area, this looks a little bit like a salt and pepper area.
And what happened here, what happened is sitting on the pad, the night before we
were to launch STS-IV, we had a typical Florida hail storm. And it actually was
enough to crack this coating on these tiles. And this is pretty much what it
looked like, uh, before we launched. We, it would have been a terrible thing to
have to stop and repair all this tile. So what we did, and this is a shot on the
bottom side, and it looks kinda messy, but it worked. We actually painted with
this liquid silica, Ludox. Just painted over it to kind of give it a glass
finish. It was mostly clear. And as a result, it came through the entry just
fine. All of our thermal experts said it would, and it did. And we ended up, out
of all this hail damage, only having to replace two tiles. And we did repair the
rest of them in place with a black coating after the flight.
One more subject on tile. I'm sorry, I did have one more. and this was in an
area between the elevant on this vehicle is split, and we knew there was going
to be hot gases flowing through here, so we went to an ablater because the
estimates were that the temperature was going to get hot enough, and you can see
actually it's really ablated in here. But we found that some of the fellows
thought that we could replace that, and we did on later vehicles, and we've now
retrofitted them all with some high-density tile. Slightly higher than 9 pounds
per square foot and it ended up we saved $550,000 a flight and quite a bit of
weight That's a good kind of problem to solve It didn't cause anything just
saved us some money
In summary, I think that that we've got a system, the space shuttle that works
very well and I think it's gonna get from here on nothing but better I mentioned
that we were in an infant stage We've launched 12 flights since 1981, we will
launch 12 more in the next 12 months. We're going to be flying once a month in
the next 12 months. If we can all keep our sanity and our families and
everything else and going crazy, it'll be an interesting year for us. We are
planning to go to a 24-flight rate per year in 1986-87 timeframe. Right. So,
about every payday we'll be launching a mission, a shuttle mission into space,
and that's a terrible thought to think of having to do it that often, but we're
ready for it. I guess one person might, some people might ask, why are you doing
it? And well, for one thing, we think it's a very capable and flexible system.
But there's another reason, and that is, and I'm just gonna tickle you with this
one, I'm not gonna talk much about it, but that's because of this device, the
space station. This is hot off the press as I left Houston. I brought it with
me. It shows an orbiter docked to what we think is going to be close to the
final configuration for space station. We call it the power tower because it's a
rather long spine,
if you will, that holds solar panels. These are radiators right here to radiate
the heat, and all the living modules are down in this area. There's a large
communication platform. You see the shuttle docked up to it here. With the space
station, I think we'll have the infrastructure established for a truly
operational system. Shuttle without station and station without shuttle really
don't mix too well. In fact, neither one of them are in themselves, but together
they form a very, very capable thing for the free world to have as a unit. We
will use this thing as a wave station. We will station satellites there to be
later launched onto higher altitudes. We will use it for a scientific
observatory. We will use it for metals or materials testing, and we'll use it
for maintaining a preeminence in the free world for space technology. I was
telling someone earlier this afternoon, with the shuttle we've pretty well kind
of built the highway, if you will, and now we've got to build some, some filling
stations, petrol stations, and we've got to build some places to stop and do
some things without just these little short bursts of manned flight. Certainly
the Russians are doing that. They're brute strengthening it. They're doing it
with brute strength. But they are pretty much living in space now all along and
they are learning a great deal. So I know they must be, and we feel that it's
imperative that we do the same thing. The international involvement on the space
station is going to be great, and by that I mean large. The President has
invited international participation from our friends. We're seeing a lot of
interest generated amongst the ESA states. ESA as an organization and at least
from Germany as a unilateral, let me say, push. The Japanese are very interested
in it, very aggressive. They're spending a lot of time with us in Houston. I
hope that the UK will take the same steps. This country, in my thinking, has
been an engineering leader for many, many years. You've had some of the best
ideas, you've had some of the best minds put together to do things, it would
really be, I think, good for us, it would be good for the free world to use your
brain power in building a device like this that can, it's probably a 30- to 50
-year facility and that's it should be thought of as a facility, it's not a
spaceship, and we need the best brains that we can bring to bear on the subject.
I know that many of you are pushing in that direction. I know there's, like in
our country, it's never easy to push these kind of rather far-reaching ideas.
But I hope that there is some impetus amongst the technical community that can
convince the political community in your country to participate in a large way.
And we would welcome your participation and hope we see it. With that, I will
close, and I thank you very much. Goal for main engine start 8, 7, 6 We have
main engine start 3, 2 1, solid motor Ignition and lift off Lift off of
Challenger in the First flight to repair a satellite in space We have cleared
the tower
I'm out.
I'll see in the second session L-23. Well, we've not reached.
This is L-13, we've been flying off.